Next let's talk about wolff-parkinson-white syndrome or wpw which is also appropriately called ventricular
Pre excitation syndrome
This syndrome affects about 1 in 1.500 people and it is highly tested because of the unique ECG appearance
And correlation with the underlying physiology
These people have an accessory pathway
AK
Bypass track
Known as a bundle of Kent
The connect
The Atria to the ventricles
This allows atrial impulses to bypass the AV node and transmit right through the venture
Because the bundle of Kent last the gatekeeper function of the AV node the atrial impulse is conducted very rapidly to the venture
Which causes shortening of the PR interval
However the accessory pathway does not connect
To the rapid his purkinje system
Instead the impulse spreads throughout the ventricles via the slow ventricular myocardium
So that would look like this on ECG right
Concurrently the atrial impulses are transmitted normally through the AV node to the rapid
Pittsburgh
And that looks like that
Does the QRS pattern will be a combination of the early activation via the accessory pathway
As well as the normal activation we are the normal pathway
When you combine these together
You see a slurred upstroke that looks like a notch at the beginning of the QRS
This is called the Delta wave
And this Delta wave widens the QRS
So the features of wpw or short PR interval do the early activation of the ventricles
The accessory pathway
A Delta wave at the beginning of the QRS
And a prolonged QRS
Because the QRS is really the slow accessory ventricular activation superimposed on top of the normal ventricular app
Activation
The delta-wave is the obvious giveaway for quickly recognizing wpw
This example
Shows a PR interval under three small boxes or 120 milliseconds
So what is short
It has a Delta Notch that is most obvious here in lead AVL
And has a prolonged QRS greater than 3.5 small boxes
Now imagine that a patient has accessory pathway in addition to a favor a flutter
The constant barrage of atrial impulses have another route
To the ventricles using the accessory pathway
I can bypass the AV nodes gatekeeper function
Causing severe tachycardia
A-fib plus wpw can cause ventricular rates that reach 300 beats per minute which can be fatal
There's also a scenario
Where the impulse can travel anterograde down the AV node and then splits
Impulse continues anterograde to activate the ventricle
Spinner also travels retrograde
Through the accessory tract and reactivate the AV node
The opposite is also possible
Where the impulse travels anterograde down accessory track
And then activates the ventricles
And travels retrograde through the AV node to reactivate the accessory path
This is known as a reentrant loop
I can cause constant activation of The ventricle
Which precipitates a severe tachycardia
This is called atrioventricular reentrant tachycardia
Or avrt
Enter the type of paroxysmal SVT
Symptoms include palpitations and syncope
But it can also cause sudden cardiac death
When the patient is in sinus rhythm wpw will have a unique ECG appearance
Due to the accessory pathway
But is usually asymptomatic
This is called a wpw pattern and it predisposes the patient to the dangerous arrhythmia
But this is not referred to as wpw syndrome
When the accessory pathway forms re-entrant Loop that causes a VRT
This is referred to as wpw syndrome
Treatment of wpw syndrome is tricky because the normal beta blockers and calcium channel blockers
Contraindicated in certain types of wpw
Specifically when a fib and a flutter or causing ventricular pre-excitation through the accessory pathway
Beta blockers and calcium channel blockers are effective at slowing down conduction through the AV node
But they may actually speed up conduction through an accessory track
And what does contraindicated
Ibutilide
Class 3 antiarrhythmic
Is effective
I prolong the refractory period of both the AV node and the accessory pathway
And can often terminate the arrhythmia
Importantly if a tachycardia is ever causing he would anomic instability
Electrical cardioversion is needed emergently
Catheter ablation of the accessory pathway is Curative but would never be attempting in an emergency
Lastly let's talk about AV nodal reentrant tachycardia
Or avnrt
Mostly because the physiology is really cool
Avnrt
Like a VRT
Is a type of paroxysmal SVT
It is somewhat unique because it usually occurs in young adults with otherwise Normal Heart
What's in the AV node
Some people have two Pathways with different electrical features
The fast pathway has a fast conduction velocity
The long refractory period
While the slow pathway has a slow conduction velocity but a shorter refractory period
Normally an atrial impulse activates them both
But the fast pathway reaches the bundle of his first
Activating ventricular depolarization
By the time the slow pathway gets there
The bundle of hiss is in its refractory period
And the slow pathway signal is extinguished
So the fast pathway is the only functional pathway under normal conditions
However if there was a random perfectly-timed atrial premature beat
It may reach the AV node while the fast pathway is still refractory
The slow pathway has a shorter refractory period
So the impulse can travel down the slow Pathway to reach the bundle of hiss
Which propagates the impulse to the ventricles
When the impulse reaches the bundle of hiss the fast pathway is no longer a fracture
So in addition to traveling anterograde to the ventricles
The impulse actually travels backward or retrograde through the fast pathway
It activates the Atria of the arrest regret conduction
Causing the Atria to contract while the ventricles are Contracting
But it also reactivates the slope app
So the slow pathway activates the ventricles and the fast pathway
And then the fast pathway activates the Atria and the slow pathway
This causes re-entrant Loop
An atria and ventricles are constantly stimulated at the same time
So avrt is when a reactant Lube is created between the AV node and then accessory tract
The connects the Atria to the ventricles
Such as in wpw syndrome
Avnrt is when a reentrant loop is created between the fast and slow Pathways within the AV node
They have the same clinical presentation
And you cannot distinguish between the two on ECG
So both fall under the label of paroxysmal SVT
To tell avrt from avnrt
You need to map the cardiac conduction system Vienna EP study
So what does paroxysmal SVT look like on an ECG
Does tachycardia usually between 140 and 250 beats per minute
Is also absent P wave because the retrograde activation of the Atria
Occurs at the same time as anterograde activation of the ventricles
So the p waves are hidden in the QRS complex
If p waves are present they will occur slightly after the QRS complex
They will be inverted in the inferior leads 2 3 and avf because the APR being depolarized in retrograde fashion
Meaning the impulse spreads superiorly away from those leads
Through also be a narrow or normal QRS interval
Is absolutely crucial to note that an avnrt and usually avrt
The ventricles are being activated by the normal intrinsic his purkinje system
7th regular contractions should be crisp
The QRS interval
Should be normal or under 120 milliseconds
Men getting narrow complex tachycardia
This is important because absent p waves and wide QRS complexes
What indicates ventricular tachycardia which is a potentially fatal condition that would be handled differently
In addition note that the QRS complexes occur at regular intervals in avnrt
Which helps differentiate it from the irregularly irregular pattern of aphid
And lastly st-segment depressions and T wave inversions are often present
They're caused by repolarization abnormalities and usually do not indicate ischemia unless there's underlying coronary artery disease
Avnrt is known as a paroxysmal SVT
And the word paroxysmal means sudden onset of severe symptoms with sudden termination
So these attacks usually are spontaneous and seem to come out of nowhere
Although attacks can sometimes be linked to nicotine alcohol stimulants or exercise
In otherwise healthy patients the symptoms are usually limited to palpitations
Sometimes patients may experience light-headedness or shortness of breath
And patients with underlying cardiac problems may experience syncope your engine
Treatments are and a decrease in the conduction velocity of the AV node
We can terminate the avnrt
You can start with vagal Maneuvers with valsalva being more effective than carotid massage
You could give IV adenosine starting with 6 mg
You can also give IV calcium channel blockers beta blockers or digoxin
Severe hemodynamic compromise requires emergent electrical cardioversion
Although this is really necessary with AV on RT
Catheter ablation of the slow pathway of the AV node
Can be cured
However you risk causing AV block if you also damage the fast pathway
And as prevention for recurrent attacks you can give oral calcium channel blockers beta blockers digoxin or anti
Eurythmics but those have severe side effects